01 - On Racing the Beam/02 - What the Beam Races On.md, before:



---------------- Table of Contents ---------------- 

1. [Welcome](#welcome)
2. [Logistics](#logistics)
3. [TLDR](#tldr)
4. [Day 1](#day1)
5. [Day 2](#day2)

---------------- Table of Contents ---------------- 
Before we get into the technology we'll be working with, I wanted to take some time to talk about the directionality of tech. We tend to use terms that imply direction with regard to technology; for example, progressed, advanced, cutting edge, and more.

While these terms imply "new," they don't really do much for us outside of knowing that there's something new and there always will be as the word design can also be replaced with criticism. After all, if things were newer and therefore better, we wouldn't be constantly striving for some new, new thing.

And so, this is a course reserved for something that is neither cutting edge, nor new. As we move through the communities around this space, you'll hear words like "primitive" or "antiquated." These terms are true for more than just the tech in that video games themselves were new and having a joystick + button is kind of limiting.

However, the 2600 was just re-released. It is a new console. The 6502 chip is still an active and near omni-present force in technologies. We have seen it in all manner of device and will continue to see those things in new devices. As such, it is important here to say that this course expressly stands against this constant seeking of new in service to some direction. Instead, this course stands in testament that for every new bleeding edge, there are innumerable past edges that are still bleeding, if not scabbed over or infected.

Tech is constantly changing, not advancing or heading somewhere. Sometimes we have to stop and deal with the reality of things, not the market of things. So, be mindful of your mindset as it can close doors to you, or open more than you might know of now.
# <a id = "day2"></a>Day 2 - Tech Specs and More
Today we will spend a bunch of time talking about the tech specs of the Atari 2600. While this often does not matter for our courses here in GCCIS, we'll be directly interfacing with the hardware (know emulated software). A lot of what we'll be doing isn't dictating what part of a cartesian graph to illuminate with sprites or graphics, but telling an electron beam travelling across the screen when to show certain kinds of pixels. Much of this will be in binary though at times we'll be using hexadecimal or literal numbers.

We must prepare ourselves for this journey then, so we'll be concentrating on the chipset inside the original 2600. To that end, take a look. We'll show you a picture of the board, a diagram of the board, and mention the old issues around NTSC and PAL: 
![](mobo.jpg)
So, we have a lot going on here. The power supply does what it does, that much should make logical sense. However, we then have a bunch of switches ranging from dictating channel, joystick inputs, difficulty switches, video out, and the ROM/Cartridge reader. 

But then we have things like the Microprocessor, RIOT, TIA, Sound adjustors, and color adjustors. What do those do?

* 6507
	* This is the processor for the Atari itself. It is based, as the name of the language might imply, on the 6502 Processor. Chuck Pebble, who designed the original 6502 chip for Motorola, went to a new company called MOS and redesigned the chip and tried to make it cheaper. The 6507 was an even cheaper version of the chip and came it at around $20 per chip. This decreased the price point of the console by quite a lot.
		* The 6507 compared to the 6502 checklist: 
28 pins instead of 40 
![](MOS6502.png) ![](6507.gif)

Price point comparisons.
		* 
* 6532/RIOT
	* This stands for "RAM" + I/O or input/output + Timer. 
		* RAM = 128 bytes of RAM
		* I/O = 2 (1 for switches, 1 for controllers)
		* Timer
* TIA


![](2600_wires.jpg)

![](TIA.jpg)

That is a pretty in depth overview. Let's take a bit of a lower level look at the physical aspects of the chips. Here is a list of specs we'll be working on and expanding on: 

* Processor Speed = 1.19mhz
	* Registers:
		* A = accumulator (8-bit)
		* X = index register (8-bit)
		* Y = index register (8-bit)
		* PC = Program Counter (16 bit)
		* SP = Stack Pointer (8-bit) but is slightly offset 
		* ST = Processor Status (8-bit)
* RAM = 128 bytes
* ROM (This is your cartridge) = 4kb (it is possible to do 8k but we won't in this course) and it contains the game logic, graphics, and kernal instructions
* TIA = Television Interface Adaptor
	* Jay Miner designed it. This thing took the most amount of time to design for the 2600. What it does is essentially communicate with the television and will dictate things like collision, output the input from controllers, and produce sound. 
* RIOT was covered above but for the purposes here, 

Finally, I want to note something with regard to the book we'll be reading here, "Racing the Beam." This refers to the literal way the Atari 2600 assembles the pieces above. 

Unlike many of the pieces of software we make today for tvs where we draw graphics frame by frame, the Atari 2600 did a lot to make the hardware cheap in order to sell well. As a result, they didn't have things like sprite sheets or ways to call up preformed graphics. 

The result is that a screen is drawn line by line. To save memory, if nothing is changed, the next line is drawn like the one before it. This means there also aren't any X,Y coordinate systems as there are no registers for Y-components. We simply wait until the electron beam gets there. 

As a result, a designer has to design a game around the idea that you need to tell the TIA what to show each line while it is actually creating that line. 

This is called "Racing the beam" and is the general reason that programming for the 2600 is obtuse and complicated.
#### On Bankswitching
So, we're going to be working mostly in the world of Assembly as it is in the present. We're going to be working with exactly 4k space on carts. You can do more but i'll leave that with you as the Atari existed at least 4 years until memory banking was figured out. Rather than do the most complex stuff first, we'll be talking and working on exactly 4k of space (as opposed to the original 2k for *Combat*). If you want to explore bankswitching and get yourself somewhere in the vicinity of the 64k the 6502 was capable of, you're welcome to (but outside of class as I will not support it).

Let's take a bit more inventory of what we'll be working with in a way that most game makers will be used to: 
## Resolution 
![](resolution.png)
What do these terms mean?
* Clock Counts
* Vertical Sync
* Vertical Blank
* Horizontal Blank
* Actual TV Picture
* Overscan
* Scanlines

And so that's the screen of the machine. There are also reservations and dictated memory allocations for certain things. For example: 
_Background color_

* 2 player sprites (8 bit), each with its own color
* Playfield with own color – can also re-use player colors
* 2 missile sprites (1 bit), re-using player colors
* 1 ball sprite (1 bit), re-using playfield color
* Requirements: run "Combat" and "Pong"

Chipset and hardware

Here is where things get funky. Atari didn't want to pay for the full 6502, they wanted to strip it down and make it even cheaper. With the help of the Intel 8080 and MOS6502 developer Chuck Pebble, they came up with the 6507. 

The result was a price point that could get this box into the homes of everyone. 

Next week: The elements of the screen, IDEs, and Getting Started - pipeline and experimentation, other places to practice.

Week 03 - Hello World

Commit message:

Adding some more files, getting more in place.

01 - On Racing the Beam/02 - What the Beam Races On.md, after:

---------------- Table of Contents ---------------- 

1. Day 2 - Tech Specs and More
	1. On Bankswitching
	2. Resolution
2. [Logistics](#logistics)
3. [TLDR](#tldr)
4. [Day 1](#day1)
5. [Day 2](#day2)

---------------- Table of Contents ---------------- 
Before we get into the technology we'll be working with, I wanted to take some time to talk about the directionality of tech. We tend to use terms that imply direction with regard to technology; for example, progressed, advanced, cutting edge, and more.

While these terms imply "new," they don't really do much for us outside of knowing that there's something new and there always will be as the word design can also be replaced with criticism. After all, if things were newer and therefore better, we wouldn't be constantly striving for some new, new thing.

And so, this is a course reserved for something that is neither cutting edge, nor new. As we move through the communities around this space, you'll hear words like "primitive" or "antiquated." These terms are true for more than just the tech in that video games themselves were new and having a joystick + button is kind of limiting.

However, the 2600 was just re-released. It is a new console. The 6502 chip is still an active and near omni-present force in technologies. We have seen it in all manner of device and will continue to see those things in new devices. As such, it is important here to say that this course expressly stands against this constant seeking of new in service to some direction. Instead, this course stands in testament that for every new bleeding edge, there are innumerable past edges that are still bleeding, if not scabbed over or infected.

Tech is constantly changing, not advancing or heading somewhere. Sometimes we have to stop and deal with the reality of things, not the market of things. So, be mindful of your mindset as it can close doors to you, or open more than you might know of now.
# <a id = "day2"></a>Day 2 - Tech Specs and More
Today we will spend a bunch of time talking about the tech specs of the Atari 2600. While this often does not matter for our courses here in GCCIS, we'll be directly interfacing with the hardware (know emulated software). A lot of what we'll be doing isn't dictating what part of a cartesian graph to illuminate with sprites or graphics, but telling an electron beam travelling across the screen when to show certain kinds of pixels. Much of this will be in binary though at times we'll be using hexadecimal or literal numbers.

We must prepare ourselves for this journey then, so we'll be concentrating on the chipset inside the original 2600. To that end, take a look. We'll show you a picture of the board, a diagram of the board, and mention the old issues around NTSC and PAL: 
![](mobo.jpg)
So, we have a lot going on here. The power supply does what it does, that much should make logical sense. However, we then have a bunch of switches ranging from dictating channel, joystick inputs, difficulty switches, video out, and the ROM/Cartridge reader. 

But then we have things like the Microprocessor, RIOT, TIA, Sound adjustors, and color adjustors. What do those do?

* 6507
	* This is the processor for the Atari itself. It is based, as the name of the language might imply, on the 6502 Processor. Chuck Pebble, who designed the original 6502 chip for Motorola, went to a new company called MOS and redesigned the chip and tried to make it cheaper. The 6507 was an even cheaper version of the chip and came it at around $20 per chip. This decreased the price point of the console by quite a lot.
		* The 6507 compared to the 6502 checklist: 
28 pins instead of 40 
![](MOS6502.png) ![](6507.gif)

Price point comparisons.
		* 
* 6532/RIOT
	* This stands for "RAM" + I/O or input/output + Timer. 
		* RAM = 128 bytes of RAM
		* I/O = 2 (1 for switches, 1 for controllers)
		* Timer
* TIA


![](2600_wires.jpg)

![](TIA.jpg)

That is a pretty in depth overview. Let's take a bit of a lower level look at the physical aspects of the chips. Here is a list of specs we'll be working on and expanding on: 

* Processor Speed = 1.19mhz
	* Registers:
		* A = accumulator (8-bit)
		* X = index register (8-bit)
		* Y = index register (8-bit)
		* PC = Program Counter (16 bit)
		* SP = Stack Pointer (8-bit) but is slightly offset 
		* ST = Processor Status (8-bit)
* RAM = 128 bytes
* ROM (This is your cartridge) = 4kb (it is possible to do 8k but we won't in this course) and it contains the game logic, graphics, and kernal instructions
* TIA = Television Interface Adaptor
	* Jay Miner designed it. This thing took the most amount of time to design for the 2600. What it does is essentially communicate with the television and will dictate things like collision, output the input from controllers, and produce sound. 
* RIOT was covered above but for the purposes here, 

Finally, I want to note something with regard to the book we'll be reading here, "Racing the Beam." This refers to the literal way the Atari 2600 assembles the pieces above. 

Unlike many of the pieces of software we make today for tvs where we draw graphics frame by frame, the Atari 2600 did a lot to make the hardware cheap in order to sell well. As a result, they didn't have things like sprite sheets or ways to call up preformed graphics. 

The result is that a screen is drawn line by line. To save memory, if nothing is changed, the next line is drawn like the one before it. This means there also aren't any X,Y coordinate systems as there are no registers for Y-components. We simply wait until the electron beam gets there. 

As a result, a designer has to design a game around the idea that you need to tell the TIA what to show each line while it is actually creating that line. 

This is called "Racing the beam" and is the general reason that programming for the 2600 is obtuse and complicated.
#### On Bankswitching
So, we're going to be working mostly in the world of Assembly as it is in the present. We're going to be working with exactly 4k space on carts. You can do more but i'll leave that with you as the Atari existed at least 4 years until memory banking was figured out. Rather than do the most complex stuff first, we'll be talking and working on exactly 4k of space (as opposed to the original 2k for *Combat*). If you want to explore bankswitching and get yourself somewhere in the vicinity of the 64k the 6502 was capable of, you're welcome to (but outside of class as I will not support it).

Let's take a bit more inventory of what we'll be working with in a way that most game makers will be used to: 
## Resolution 
![](resolution.png)
What do these terms mean?
* Clock Counts
* Vertical Sync
* Vertical Blank
* Horizontal Blank
* Actual TV Picture
* Overscan
* Scanlines

And so that's the screen of the machine. There are also reservations and dictated memory allocations for certain things. For example: 
_Background color_

* 2 player sprites (8 bit), each with its own color
* Playfield with own color – can also re-use player colors
* 2 missile sprites (1 bit), re-using player colors
* 1 ball sprite (1 bit), re-using playfield color
* Requirements: run "Combat" and "Pong"

Chipset and hardware

Here is where things get funky. Atari didn't want to pay for the full 6502, they wanted to strip it down and make it even cheaper. With the help of the Intel 8080 and MOS6502 developer Chuck Pebble, they came up with the 6507. 

The result was a price point that could get this box into the homes of everyone. 

Next week: The elements of the screen, IDEs, and Getting Started - pipeline and experimentation, other places to practice.

Week 03 - Hello World
